docs/docs/daft.md, before:

---
title: "Daft"
---
<!--
 - Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
 - contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
 - this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
 - The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
 - (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
 - the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
 -
 -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 -
 - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 - distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 - WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 - See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 - limitations under the License.
 -->

# Daft

[Daft](www.getdaft.io) is a distributed query engine written in Python and Rust, two fast-growing ecosystems in the data engineering and machine learning industry.
It exposes it's flavor of the widely adopted [DataFrame API](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/dataframe.html) akin to many existing Python libraries.

Iceberg supports reading of Iceberg tables into Daft DataFrames by using the Python client library [PyIceberg](https://py.iceberg.apache.org/).

For Python users, Daft is complementary to PyIceberg as a query engine layer:

* **PyIceberg:** catalog/table management tasks (e.g. creation of tables, modifying table schemas)
* **Daft:** querying tables (e.g. previewing tables, data ETL and analysis)

In database terms, PyIceberg is the Data Description Language (DDL) for database administration and Daft is the Data Manipulation Language (DML) for querying data.

## Enabling Iceberg support in Daft

To use Iceberg with Daft, ensure that the [PyIceberg](https://py.iceberg.apache.org/) library is also installed in your current Python environment.

```
pip install getdaft pyiceberg
```

## Querying Iceberg using Daft

Daft interacts natively with [PyIceberg](https://py.iceberg.apache.org/) to read Iceberg tables.

### Reading Iceberg tables

Create an Iceberg table following [the spark-quickstart tutorial](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-quickstart/). 

Load the Iceberg table `demo.nyc.taxis` it into Daft, limiting to the first three columns.

``` py
import daft
from pyiceberg import load_catalog

table = load_catalog("my_catalog").load_table("my_tpch_namespace.lineitem")
df = daft.read_iceberg(table)
df = df.select("L_SHIPDATE", "L_ORDERKEY", "L_COMMENT")
df.show()
```

```
╭────────────┬────────────┬────────────────────────────────╮
│ L_SHIPDATE ┆ L_ORDERKEY ┆ L_COMMENT                      │
│ ---        ┆ ---        ┆ ---                            │
│ Date       ┆ Int64      ┆ Utf8                           │
╞════════════╪════════════╪════════════════════════════════╡
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 2186280097 ┆ ions sleep about the si        │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 175366628  ┆ gular accoun                   │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 2186602151 ┆ blithely even                  │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 3937663654 ┆ ake boldly among the ideas. s… │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 2186781220 ┆ thely. slyly pending ideas ar… │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 3937999493 ┆  haggle at the regular, pen    │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 2186933061 ┆ ickly. slyly                   │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 3938167204 ┆ carefully silent instructions… │
╰────────────┴────────────┴────────────────────────────────╯

(Showing first 8 rows)
```

Any filter operations on the Daft dataframe, `df`, will [push down the filters](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/performance/#data-filtering), effectuate [hidden partitioning](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/partitioning/), and utilize [table statistics to inform query planning](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/performance/#scan-planning) for efficient reads.

``` py
import datetime

# Filter which takes advantage of partition pruning capabilities of Iceberg
df = df.where(df["L_SHIPDATE"] > datetime.date(1993, 1, 1))
df.show()
```

```
╭────────────┬────────────┬────────────────────────────────╮
│ L_SHIPDATE ┆ L_ORDERKEY ┆ L_COMMENT                      │                                                                        
│ ---        ┆ ---        ┆ ---                            │
│ Date       ┆ Int64      ┆ Utf8                           │
╞════════════╪════════════╪════════════════════════════════╡
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 5695313125 ┆  slyly special p               │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 2701326853 ┆ ironic instru                  │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 5695313766 ┆ ly according                   │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 2701330720 ┆ y alongside of the blithely    │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 5695315200 ┆ ckly final foxes haggle car    │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 2701331524 ┆ ns doze slyly pending instruc… │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 5695317377 ┆ re about the ironic, silen     │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 2701342819 ┆ fully even pinto beans wa      │
╰────────────┴────────────┴────────────────────────────────╯

(Showing first 8 rows)
```

### Type compatibility

Daft and Iceberg have compatible type systems. Here are how types are converted across the two systems.

When reading from an Iceberg source into Daft:

| Iceberg | Daft |
|---------|------|
| **Primitive Types** |
| `boolean` | [`daft.DataType.bool()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.bool) |
| `int` | [`daft.DataType.int32()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.int32) |
| `long` | [`daft.DataType.int64()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.int64) |
| `float` | [`daft.DataType.float32()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.float32) |
| `double` | [`daft.DataType.float64()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.float64) |
| `decimal(precision, scale)` | [`daft.DataType.decimal128(precision, scale)`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.decimal128) |
| `date` | [`daft.DataType.date()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.date) |
| `time` | [`daft.DataType.time(timeunit="us")`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.int64) |
| `timestamp` | [`daft.DataType.timestamp(timeunit="us", timezone=None)`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.timestamp) |
| `timestampz` | [`daft.DataType.timestamp(timeunit="us", timezone="UTC")`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.timestamp) |
| `string` | [`daft.DataType.string()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.string) |
| `uuid` | [`daft.DataType.binary()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.binary) |
| `fixed(L)` | [`daft.DataType.binary()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.binary) |
| `binary` | [`daft.DataType.binary()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.binary) |
| **Nested Types** |
| `struct(**fields)` | [`daft.DataType.struct(**fields)`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.struct) |
| `list(child_type)` | [`daft.DataType.list(child_type)`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.list) |
| `map(K, V)` | [`daft.DataType.map(K, V)`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.map) |

Commit message:

Better explain complementary nature of PyIceberg and Daft

docs/docs/daft.md, after:

---
title: "Daft"
---
<!--
 - Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
 - contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
 - this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
 - The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
 - (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
 - the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
 -
 -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 -
 - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 - distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 - WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 - See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 - limitations under the License.
 -->

# Daft

[Daft](www.getdaft.io) is a distributed query engine written in Python and Rust, two fast-growing ecosystems in the data engineering and machine learning industry.

It exposes its flavor of the familiar [Python DataFrame API](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/dataframe.html) which is a common abstraction over querying tables of data in the Python data ecosystem.

Daft DataFrames are a powerful interface to power use-cases across ML/AI training, batch inference, feature engineering and traditional analytics. Daft's tight integration with Iceberg unlocks novel capabilities for both traditional analytics and Pythonic ML workloads on your data catalog.

## Enabling Iceberg support in Daft

[PyIceberg](https://py.iceberg.apache.org/) supports reading of Iceberg tables into Daft DataFrames. 

To use Iceberg with Daft, ensure that the [PyIceberg](https://py.iceberg.apache.org/) library is also installed in your current Python environment.

```
pip install getdaft pyiceberg
```

## Querying Iceberg using Daft

Daft interacts natively with [PyIceberg](https://py.iceberg.apache.org/) to read Iceberg tables.

### Reading Iceberg tables

Create an Iceberg table following [the spark-quickstart tutorial](https://iceberg.apache.org/spark-quickstart/). 

Load the Iceberg table `demo.nyc.taxis` it into Daft, limiting to the first three columns.

``` py
import daft
from pyiceberg import load_catalog

table = load_catalog("my_catalog").load_table("my_tpch_namespace.lineitem")
df = daft.read_iceberg(table)
df = df.select("L_SHIPDATE", "L_ORDERKEY", "L_COMMENT")
df.show()
```

```
╭────────────┬────────────┬────────────────────────────────╮
│ L_SHIPDATE ┆ L_ORDERKEY ┆ L_COMMENT                      │
│ ---        ┆ ---        ┆ ---                            │
│ Date       ┆ Int64      ┆ Utf8                           │
╞════════════╪════════════╪════════════════════════════════╡
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 2186280097 ┆ ions sleep about the si        │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 175366628  ┆ gular accoun                   │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 2186602151 ┆ blithely even                  │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 3937663654 ┆ ake boldly among the ideas. s… │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 2186781220 ┆ thely. slyly pending ideas ar… │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 3937999493 ┆  haggle at the regular, pen    │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 2186933061 ┆ ickly. slyly                   │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1992-01-02 ┆ 3938167204 ┆ carefully silent instructions… │
╰────────────┴────────────┴────────────────────────────────╯

(Showing first 8 rows)
```

Any filter operations on the Daft dataframe, `df`, will [push down the filters](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/performance/#data-filtering), effectuate [hidden partitioning](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/partitioning/), and utilize [table statistics to inform query planning](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/performance/#scan-planning) for efficient reads.

``` py
import datetime

# Filter which takes advantage of partition pruning capabilities of Iceberg
df = df.where(df["L_SHIPDATE"] > datetime.date(1993, 1, 1))
df.show()
```

```
╭────────────┬────────────┬────────────────────────────────╮
│ L_SHIPDATE ┆ L_ORDERKEY ┆ L_COMMENT                      │                                                                        
│ ---        ┆ ---        ┆ ---                            │
│ Date       ┆ Int64      ┆ Utf8                           │
╞════════════╪════════════╪════════════════════════════════╡
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 5695313125 ┆  slyly special p               │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 2701326853 ┆ ironic instru                  │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 5695313766 ┆ ly according                   │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 2701330720 ┆ y alongside of the blithely    │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 5695315200 ┆ ckly final foxes haggle car    │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 2701331524 ┆ ns doze slyly pending instruc… │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 5695317377 ┆ re about the ironic, silen     │
├╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┼╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌╌┤
│ 1993-01-02 ┆ 2701342819 ┆ fully even pinto beans wa      │
╰────────────┴────────────┴────────────────────────────────╯

(Showing first 8 rows)
```

### Type compatibility

Daft and Iceberg have compatible type systems. Here are how types are converted across the two systems.

When reading from an Iceberg source into Daft:

| Iceberg | Daft |
|---------|------|
| **Primitive Types** |
| `boolean` | [`daft.DataType.bool()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.bool) |
| `int` | [`daft.DataType.int32()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.int32) |
| `long` | [`daft.DataType.int64()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.int64) |
| `float` | [`daft.DataType.float32()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.float32) |
| `double` | [`daft.DataType.float64()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.float64) |
| `decimal(precision, scale)` | [`daft.DataType.decimal128(precision, scale)`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.decimal128) |
| `date` | [`daft.DataType.date()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.date) |
| `time` | [`daft.DataType.time(timeunit="us")`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.int64) |
| `timestamp` | [`daft.DataType.timestamp(timeunit="us", timezone=None)`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.timestamp) |
| `timestampz` | [`daft.DataType.timestamp(timeunit="us", timezone="UTC")`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.timestamp) |
| `string` | [`daft.DataType.string()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.string) |
| `uuid` | [`daft.DataType.binary()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.binary) |
| `fixed(L)` | [`daft.DataType.binary()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.binary) |
| `binary` | [`daft.DataType.binary()`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.binary) |
| **Nested Types** |
| `struct(**fields)` | [`daft.DataType.struct(**fields)`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.struct) |
| `list(child_type)` | [`daft.DataType.list(child_type)`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.list) |
| `map(K, V)` | [`daft.DataType.map(K, V)`](https://www.getdaft.io/projects/docs/en/latest/api_docs/datatype.html#daft.DataType.map) |
