docs/docs/kafka-connect.md, before:

---
title: "Kafka Connect"
---
<!--
 - Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
 - contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
 - this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
 - The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
 - (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
 - the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
 -
 -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 -
 - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 - distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 - WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 - See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 - limitations under the License.
 -->

# Kafka Connect

[Kafka Connect](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/connect/index.html) is a popular framework for moving data
in and out of Kafka via connectors. There are many different different connectors available, such as the S3 sink
for writing data from Kafka to S3 and Debezium source connectors for writing change data capture records from relational
databases to Kafka.

It has a straightforward, decentralized, distributed architecture. A cluster consists of a number of worker processes,
and a connector runs tasks on these processes to perform the work. Connector deployment is configuration driven, so
generally no code needs to be written to run a connector.

## Apache Iceberg Sink Connector

The Apache Iceberg Sink Connector for Kafka Connect is a sink connector for writing data from Kafka into Iceberg tables.

## Features

* Commit coordination for centralized Iceberg commits
* Exactly-once delivery semantics
* Multi-table fan-out
* Automatic table creation and schema evolution
* Field name mapping via Iceberg’s column mapping functionality

## Installation

The connector zip archive is created as part of the Iceberg build. You can run the build via:
```bash
./gradlew -xtest -xintegrationTest clean build
```
The zip archive will be found under `./kafka-connect/kafka-connect-runtime/build/distributions`. There is
one distribution that bundles the Hive Metastore client and related dependencies, and one that does not.
Copy the distribution archive into the Kafka Connect plugins directory on all nodes.

## Configuration

| Property                                   | Description                                                                                                      |
|--------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| iceberg.tables                             | Comma-separated list of destination tables                                                                       |
| iceberg.tables.dynamic-enabled             | Set to `true` to route to a table specified in `routeField` instead of using `routeRegex`, default is `false`    |
| iceberg.tables.route-field                 | For multi-table fan-out, the name of the field used to route records to tables                                   |
| iceberg.tables.default-commit-branch       | Default branch for commits, main is used if not specified                                                        |
| iceberg.tables.default-id-columns          | Default comma-separated list of columns that identify a row in tables (primary key)                              |
| iceberg.tables.default-partition-by        | Default comma-separated list of partition field names to use when creating tables                                |
| iceberg.tables.auto-create-enabled         | Set to `true` to automatically create destination tables, default is `false`                                     |
| iceberg.tables.evolve-schema-enabled       | Set to `true` to add any missing record fields to the table schema, default is `false`                           |
| iceberg.tables.schema-force-optional       | Set to `true` to set columns as optional during table create and evolution, default is `false` to respect schema |
| iceberg.tables.schema-case-insensitive     | Set to `true` to look up table columns by case-insensitive name, default is `false` for case-sensitive           |
| iceberg.tables.auto-create-props.*         | Properties set on new tables during auto-create                                                                  |
| iceberg.tables.write-props.*               | Properties passed through to Iceberg writer initialization, these take precedence                                |
| iceberg.table.\<table name\>.commit-branch | Table-specific branch for commits, use `iceberg.tables.default-commit-branch` if not specified                   |
| iceberg.table.\<table name\>.id-columns    | Comma-separated list of columns that identify a row in the table (primary key)                                   |
| iceberg.table.\<table name\>.partition-by  | Comma-separated list of partition fields to use when creating the table                                          |
| iceberg.table.\<table name\>.route-regex   | The regex used to match a record's `routeField` to a table                                                       |
| iceberg.control.topic                      | Name of the control topic, default is `control-iceberg`                                                          |
| iceberg.control.commit.interval-ms         | Commit interval in msec, default is 300,000 (5 min)                                                              |
| iceberg.control.commit.timeout-ms          | Commit timeout interval in msec, default is 30,000 (30 sec)                                                      |
| iceberg.control.commit.threads             | Number of threads to use for commits, default is (cores * 2)                                                     |
| iceberg.catalog                            | Name of the catalog, default is `iceberg`                                                                        |
| iceberg.catalog.*                          | Properties passed through to Iceberg catalog initialization                                                      |
| iceberg.hadoop-conf-dir                    | If specified, Hadoop config files in this directory will be loaded                                               |
| iceberg.hadoop.*                           | Properties passed through to the Hadoop configuration                                                            |
| iceberg.kafka.*                            | Properties passed through to control topic Kafka client initialization                                           |

If `iceberg.tables.dynamic-enabled` is `false` (the default) then you must specify `iceberg.tables`. If
`iceberg.tables.dynamic-enabled` is `true` then you must specify `iceberg.tables.route-field` which will
contain the name of the table.

### Kafka configuration

By default the connector will attempt to use Kafka client config from the worker properties for connecting to
the control topic. If that config cannot be read for some reason, Kafka client settings
can be set explicitly using `iceberg.kafka.*` properties.

#### Message format

Messages should be converted to a struct or map using the appropriate Kafka Connect converter.

### Catalog configuration

The `iceberg.catalog.*` properties are required for connecting to the Iceberg catalog. The core catalog
types are included in the default distribution, including REST, Glue, DynamoDB, Hadoop, Nessie,
JDBC, and Hive. JDBC drivers are not included in the default distribution, so you will need to include
those if needed. When using a Hive catalog, you can use the distribution that includes the Hive metastore client,
otherwise you will need to include that yourself.

To set the catalog type, you can set `iceberg.catalog.type` to `rest`, `hive`, or `hadoop`. For other
catalog types, you need to instead set `iceberg.catalog.catalog-impl` to the name of the catalog class.

#### REST example

```
"iceberg.catalog.type": "rest",
"iceberg.catalog.uri": "https://catalog-service",
"iceberg.catalog.credential": "<credential>",
"iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "<warehouse>",
```

#### Hive example

NOTE: Use the distribution that includes the HMS client (or include the HMS client yourself). Use `S3FileIO` when
using S3 for storage (the default is `HadoopFileIO` with `HiveCatalog`).
```
"iceberg.catalog.type": "hive",
"iceberg.catalog.uri": "thrift://hive:9083",
"iceberg.catalog.io-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.aws.s3.S3FileIO",
"iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "s3a://bucket/warehouse",
"iceberg.catalog.client.region": "us-east-1",
"iceberg.catalog.s3.access-key-id": "<AWS access>",
"iceberg.catalog.s3.secret-access-key": "<AWS secret>",
```

#### Glue example

```
"iceberg.catalog.catalog-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.aws.glue.GlueCatalog",
"iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "s3a://bucket/warehouse",
"iceberg.catalog.io-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.aws.s3.S3FileIO",
```

#### Nessie example

```
"iceberg.catalog.catalog-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.nessie.NessieCatalog",
"iceberg.catalog.uri": "http://localhost:19120/api/v1",
"iceberg.catalog.ref": "main",
"iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "s3a://bucket/warehouse",
"iceberg.catalog.io-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.aws.s3.S3FileIO",
```

#### Notes

Depending on your setup, you may need to also set `iceberg.catalog.s3.endpoint`, `iceberg.catalog.s3.staging-dir`,
or `iceberg.catalog.s3.path-style-access`. See the [Iceberg docs](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/) for
full details on configuring catalogs.

### Azure ADLS configuration example

When using ADLS, Azure requires the passing of AZURE_CLIENT_ID, AZURE_TENANT_ID, and AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET for its Java SDK.
If you're running Kafka Connect in a container, be sure to inject those values as environment variables. See the
[Azure Identity Client library for Java](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/java/api/overview/azure/identity-readme?view=azure-java-stable) for more information.

An example of these would be:
```
AZURE_CLIENT_ID=e564f687-7b89-4b48-80b8-111111111111
AZURE_TENANT_ID=95f2f365-f5b7-44b1-88a1-111111111111
AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET="XXX"
```
Where the CLIENT_ID is the Application ID of a registered application under
[App Registrations](https://portal.azure.com/#view/Microsoft_AAD_RegisteredApps/ApplicationsListBlade), the TENANT_ID is
from your [Azure Tenant Properties](https://portal.azure.com/#view/Microsoft_AAD_IAM/TenantProperties.ReactView), and
the CLIENT_SECRET is created within the "Certificates & Secrets" section, under "Manage" after choosing your specific
App Registration. You might have to choose "Client secrets" in the middle panel and the "+" in front of "New client secret"
to generate one. Be sure to set this variable to the Value and not the Id.

It's also important that the App Registration is granted the Role Assignment "Storage Blob Data Contributor" in your
Storage Account's Access Control (IAM), or it won't be able to write new files there.

Then, within the Connector's configuration, you'll want to include the following:

```
"iceberg.catalog.type": "rest",
"iceberg.catalog.uri": "https://catalog:8181",
"iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "abfss://storage-container-name@storageaccount.dfs.core.windows.net/warehouse",
"iceberg.catalog.io-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.azure.adlsv2.ADLSFileIO",
"iceberg.catalog.include-credentials": "true"
```

Where `storage-container-name` is the container name within your Azure Storage Account, `/warehouse` is the location
within that container where your Apache Iceberg files will be written by default (or if iceberg.tables.auto-create-enabled=true),
and the `include-credentials` parameter passes along the Azure Java client credentials along. This will configure the
Iceberg Sink connector to connect to the REST catalog implementation at `iceberg.catalog.uri` to obtain the required
Connection String for the ADLSv2 client

### Google GCS configuration example

By default, Application Default Credentials (ADC) will be used to connect to GCS. Details on how ADC works can
be found in the [Google Cloud documentation](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/application-default-credentials).

```
"iceberg.catalog.type": "rest",
"iceberg.catalog.uri": "https://catalog:8181",
"iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "gs://bucket-name/warehouse",
"iceberg.catalog.io-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.google.gcs.GCSFileIO"
```

### Hadoop configuration

When using HDFS or Hive, the sink will initialize the Hadoop configuration. First, config files
from the classpath are loaded. Next, if `iceberg.hadoop-conf-dir` is specified, config files
are loaded from that location. Finally, any `iceberg.hadoop.*` properties from the sink config are
applied. When merging these, the order of precedence is sink config > config dir > classpath.

## Examples

### Initial setup

#### Source topic

This assumes the source topic already exists and is named `events`.

#### Control topic

If your Kafka cluster has `auto.create.topics.enable` set to `true` (the default), then the control topic will be
automatically created. If not, then you will need to create the topic first. The default topic name is `control-iceberg`:
```bash
bin/kafka-topics  \
  --command-config command-config.props \
  --bootstrap-server ${CONNECT_BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS} \
  --create \
  --topic control-iceberg \
  --partitions 1
```
*NOTE: Clusters running on Confluent Cloud have `auto.create.topics.enable` set to `false` by default.*

#### Iceberg catalog configuration

Configuration properties with the prefix `iceberg.catalog.` will be passed to Iceberg catalog initialization.
See the [Iceberg docs](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/) for details on how to configure
a particular catalog.

### Single destination table

This example writes all incoming records to a single table.

#### Create the destination table

```sql
CREATE TABLE default.events (
    id STRING,
    type STRING,
    ts TIMESTAMP,
    payload STRING)
PARTITIONED BY (hours(ts))
```

#### Connector config

This example config connects to a Iceberg REST catalog.
```json
{
"name": "events-sink",
"config": {
    "connector.class": "org.apache.iceberg.connect.IcebergSinkConnector",
    "tasks.max": "2",
    "topics": "events",
    "iceberg.tables": "default.events",
    "iceberg.catalog.type": "rest",
    "iceberg.catalog.uri": "https://localhost",
    "iceberg.catalog.credential": "<credential>",
    "iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "<warehouse name>"
    }
}
```

### Multi-table fan-out, static routing

This example writes records with `type` set to `list` to the table `default.events_list`, and
writes records with `type` set to `create` to the table `default.events_create`. Other records
will be skipped.

#### Create two destination tables

```sql
CREATE TABLE default.events_list (
    id STRING,
    type STRING,
    ts TIMESTAMP,
    payload STRING)
PARTITIONED BY (hours(ts));

CREATE TABLE default.events_create (
    id STRING,
    type STRING,
    ts TIMESTAMP,
    payload STRING)
PARTITIONED BY (hours(ts));
```

#### Connector config

```json
{
"name": "events-sink",
"config": {
    "connector.class": "org.apache.iceberg.connect.IcebergSinkConnector",
    "tasks.max": "2",
    "topics": "events",
    "iceberg.tables": "default.events_list,default.events_create",
    "iceberg.tables.route-field": "type",
    "iceberg.table.default.events_list.route-regex": "list",
    "iceberg.table.default.events_create.route-regex": "create",
    "iceberg.catalog.type": "rest",
    "iceberg.catalog.uri": "https://localhost",
    "iceberg.catalog.credential": "<credential>",
    "iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "<warehouse name>"
    }
}
```

### Multi-table fan-out, dynamic routing

This example writes to tables with names from the value in the `db_table` field. If a table with
the name does not exist, then the record will be skipped. For example, if the record's `db_table`
field is set to `default.events_list`, then the record is written to the `default.events_list` table.

#### Create two destination tables

See above for creating two tables.

#### Connector config

```json
{
"name": "events-sink",
"config": {
    "connector.class": "org.apache.iceberg.connect.IcebergSinkConnector",
    "tasks.max": "2",
    "topics": "events",
    "iceberg.tables.dynamic-enabled": "true",
    "iceberg.tables.route-field": "db_table",
    "iceberg.catalog.type": "rest",
    "iceberg.catalog.uri": "https://localhost",
    "iceberg.catalog.credential": "<credential>",
    "iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "<warehouse name>"
    }
}
```

Commit message:

add note about Kafka 2.5 requirement

docs/docs/kafka-connect.md, after:

---
title: "Kafka Connect"
---
<!--
 - Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
 - contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
 - this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
 - The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
 - (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
 - the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
 -
 -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 -
 - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 - distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 - WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 - See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 - limitations under the License.
 -->

# Kafka Connect

[Kafka Connect](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/connect/index.html) is a popular framework for moving data
in and out of Kafka via connectors. There are many different different connectors available, such as the S3 sink
for writing data from Kafka to S3 and Debezium source connectors for writing change data capture records from relational
databases to Kafka.

It has a straightforward, decentralized, distributed architecture. A cluster consists of a number of worker processes,
and a connector runs tasks on these processes to perform the work. Connector deployment is configuration driven, so
generally no code needs to be written to run a connector.

## Apache Iceberg Sink Connector

The Apache Iceberg Sink Connector for Kafka Connect is a sink connector for writing data from Kafka into Iceberg tables.

## Features

* Commit coordination for centralized Iceberg commits
* Exactly-once delivery semantics
* Multi-table fan-out
* Automatic table creation and schema evolution
* Field name mapping via Iceberg’s column mapping functionality

## Installation

The connector zip archive is created as part of the Iceberg build. You can run the build via:
```bash
./gradlew -xtest -xintegrationTest clean build
```
The zip archive will be found under `./kafka-connect/kafka-connect-runtime/build/distributions`. There is
one distribution that bundles the Hive Metastore client and related dependencies, and one that does not.
Copy the distribution archive into the Kafka Connect plugins directory on all nodes.

## Requirements

The sink relies on [KIP-447](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-447%3A+Producer+scalability+for+exactly+once+semantics)
for exactly-once semantics. This requires Kafka 2.5 or later.

## Configuration

| Property                                   | Description                                                                                                      |
|--------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| iceberg.tables                             | Comma-separated list of destination tables                                                                       |
| iceberg.tables.dynamic-enabled             | Set to `true` to route to a table specified in `routeField` instead of using `routeRegex`, default is `false`    |
| iceberg.tables.route-field                 | For multi-table fan-out, the name of the field used to route records to tables                                   |
| iceberg.tables.default-commit-branch       | Default branch for commits, main is used if not specified                                                        |
| iceberg.tables.default-id-columns          | Default comma-separated list of columns that identify a row in tables (primary key)                              |
| iceberg.tables.default-partition-by        | Default comma-separated list of partition field names to use when creating tables                                |
| iceberg.tables.auto-create-enabled         | Set to `true` to automatically create destination tables, default is `false`                                     |
| iceberg.tables.evolve-schema-enabled       | Set to `true` to add any missing record fields to the table schema, default is `false`                           |
| iceberg.tables.schema-force-optional       | Set to `true` to set columns as optional during table create and evolution, default is `false` to respect schema |
| iceberg.tables.schema-case-insensitive     | Set to `true` to look up table columns by case-insensitive name, default is `false` for case-sensitive           |
| iceberg.tables.auto-create-props.*         | Properties set on new tables during auto-create                                                                  |
| iceberg.tables.write-props.*               | Properties passed through to Iceberg writer initialization, these take precedence                                |
| iceberg.table.\<table name\>.commit-branch | Table-specific branch for commits, use `iceberg.tables.default-commit-branch` if not specified                   |
| iceberg.table.\<table name\>.id-columns    | Comma-separated list of columns that identify a row in the table (primary key)                                   |
| iceberg.table.\<table name\>.partition-by  | Comma-separated list of partition fields to use when creating the table                                          |
| iceberg.table.\<table name\>.route-regex   | The regex used to match a record's `routeField` to a table                                                       |
| iceberg.control.topic                      | Name of the control topic, default is `control-iceberg`                                                          |
| iceberg.control.commit.interval-ms         | Commit interval in msec, default is 300,000 (5 min)                                                              |
| iceberg.control.commit.timeout-ms          | Commit timeout interval in msec, default is 30,000 (30 sec)                                                      |
| iceberg.control.commit.threads             | Number of threads to use for commits, default is (cores * 2)                                                     |
| iceberg.catalog                            | Name of the catalog, default is `iceberg`                                                                        |
| iceberg.catalog.*                          | Properties passed through to Iceberg catalog initialization                                                      |
| iceberg.hadoop-conf-dir                    | If specified, Hadoop config files in this directory will be loaded                                               |
| iceberg.hadoop.*                           | Properties passed through to the Hadoop configuration                                                            |
| iceberg.kafka.*                            | Properties passed through to control topic Kafka client initialization                                           |

If `iceberg.tables.dynamic-enabled` is `false` (the default) then you must specify `iceberg.tables`. If
`iceberg.tables.dynamic-enabled` is `true` then you must specify `iceberg.tables.route-field` which will
contain the name of the table.

### Kafka configuration

By default the connector will attempt to use Kafka client config from the worker properties for connecting to
the control topic. If that config cannot be read for some reason, Kafka client settings
can be set explicitly using `iceberg.kafka.*` properties.

#### Message format

Messages should be converted to a struct or map using the appropriate Kafka Connect converter.

### Catalog configuration

The `iceberg.catalog.*` properties are required for connecting to the Iceberg catalog. The core catalog
types are included in the default distribution, including REST, Glue, DynamoDB, Hadoop, Nessie,
JDBC, and Hive. JDBC drivers are not included in the default distribution, so you will need to include
those if needed. When using a Hive catalog, you can use the distribution that includes the Hive metastore client,
otherwise you will need to include that yourself.

To set the catalog type, you can set `iceberg.catalog.type` to `rest`, `hive`, or `hadoop`. For other
catalog types, you need to instead set `iceberg.catalog.catalog-impl` to the name of the catalog class.

#### REST example

```
"iceberg.catalog.type": "rest",
"iceberg.catalog.uri": "https://catalog-service",
"iceberg.catalog.credential": "<credential>",
"iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "<warehouse>",
```

#### Hive example

NOTE: Use the distribution that includes the HMS client (or include the HMS client yourself). Use `S3FileIO` when
using S3 for storage (the default is `HadoopFileIO` with `HiveCatalog`).
```
"iceberg.catalog.type": "hive",
"iceberg.catalog.uri": "thrift://hive:9083",
"iceberg.catalog.io-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.aws.s3.S3FileIO",
"iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "s3a://bucket/warehouse",
"iceberg.catalog.client.region": "us-east-1",
"iceberg.catalog.s3.access-key-id": "<AWS access>",
"iceberg.catalog.s3.secret-access-key": "<AWS secret>",
```

#### Glue example

```
"iceberg.catalog.catalog-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.aws.glue.GlueCatalog",
"iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "s3a://bucket/warehouse",
"iceberg.catalog.io-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.aws.s3.S3FileIO",
```

#### Nessie example

```
"iceberg.catalog.catalog-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.nessie.NessieCatalog",
"iceberg.catalog.uri": "http://localhost:19120/api/v1",
"iceberg.catalog.ref": "main",
"iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "s3a://bucket/warehouse",
"iceberg.catalog.io-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.aws.s3.S3FileIO",
```

#### Notes

Depending on your setup, you may need to also set `iceberg.catalog.s3.endpoint`, `iceberg.catalog.s3.staging-dir`,
or `iceberg.catalog.s3.path-style-access`. See the [Iceberg docs](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/) for
full details on configuring catalogs.

### Azure ADLS configuration example

When using ADLS, Azure requires the passing of AZURE_CLIENT_ID, AZURE_TENANT_ID, and AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET for its Java SDK.
If you're running Kafka Connect in a container, be sure to inject those values as environment variables. See the
[Azure Identity Client library for Java](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/java/api/overview/azure/identity-readme?view=azure-java-stable) for more information.

An example of these would be:
```
AZURE_CLIENT_ID=e564f687-7b89-4b48-80b8-111111111111
AZURE_TENANT_ID=95f2f365-f5b7-44b1-88a1-111111111111
AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET="XXX"
```
Where the CLIENT_ID is the Application ID of a registered application under
[App Registrations](https://portal.azure.com/#view/Microsoft_AAD_RegisteredApps/ApplicationsListBlade), the TENANT_ID is
from your [Azure Tenant Properties](https://portal.azure.com/#view/Microsoft_AAD_IAM/TenantProperties.ReactView), and
the CLIENT_SECRET is created within the "Certificates & Secrets" section, under "Manage" after choosing your specific
App Registration. You might have to choose "Client secrets" in the middle panel and the "+" in front of "New client secret"
to generate one. Be sure to set this variable to the Value and not the Id.

It's also important that the App Registration is granted the Role Assignment "Storage Blob Data Contributor" in your
Storage Account's Access Control (IAM), or it won't be able to write new files there.

Then, within the Connector's configuration, you'll want to include the following:

```
"iceberg.catalog.type": "rest",
"iceberg.catalog.uri": "https://catalog:8181",
"iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "abfss://storage-container-name@storageaccount.dfs.core.windows.net/warehouse",
"iceberg.catalog.io-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.azure.adlsv2.ADLSFileIO",
"iceberg.catalog.include-credentials": "true"
```

Where `storage-container-name` is the container name within your Azure Storage Account, `/warehouse` is the location
within that container where your Apache Iceberg files will be written by default (or if iceberg.tables.auto-create-enabled=true),
and the `include-credentials` parameter passes along the Azure Java client credentials along. This will configure the
Iceberg Sink connector to connect to the REST catalog implementation at `iceberg.catalog.uri` to obtain the required
Connection String for the ADLSv2 client

### Google GCS configuration example

By default, Application Default Credentials (ADC) will be used to connect to GCS. Details on how ADC works can
be found in the [Google Cloud documentation](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/application-default-credentials).

```
"iceberg.catalog.type": "rest",
"iceberg.catalog.uri": "https://catalog:8181",
"iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "gs://bucket-name/warehouse",
"iceberg.catalog.io-impl": "org.apache.iceberg.google.gcs.GCSFileIO"
```

### Hadoop configuration

When using HDFS or Hive, the sink will initialize the Hadoop configuration. First, config files
from the classpath are loaded. Next, if `iceberg.hadoop-conf-dir` is specified, config files
are loaded from that location. Finally, any `iceberg.hadoop.*` properties from the sink config are
applied. When merging these, the order of precedence is sink config > config dir > classpath.

## Examples

### Initial setup

#### Source topic

This assumes the source topic already exists and is named `events`.

#### Control topic

If your Kafka cluster has `auto.create.topics.enable` set to `true` (the default), then the control topic will be
automatically created. If not, then you will need to create the topic first. The default topic name is `control-iceberg`:
```bash
bin/kafka-topics  \
  --command-config command-config.props \
  --bootstrap-server ${CONNECT_BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS} \
  --create \
  --topic control-iceberg \
  --partitions 1
```
*NOTE: Clusters running on Confluent Cloud have `auto.create.topics.enable` set to `false` by default.*

#### Iceberg catalog configuration

Configuration properties with the prefix `iceberg.catalog.` will be passed to Iceberg catalog initialization.
See the [Iceberg docs](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/) for details on how to configure
a particular catalog.

### Single destination table

This example writes all incoming records to a single table.

#### Create the destination table

```sql
CREATE TABLE default.events (
    id STRING,
    type STRING,
    ts TIMESTAMP,
    payload STRING)
PARTITIONED BY (hours(ts))
```

#### Connector config

This example config connects to a Iceberg REST catalog.
```json
{
"name": "events-sink",
"config": {
    "connector.class": "org.apache.iceberg.connect.IcebergSinkConnector",
    "tasks.max": "2",
    "topics": "events",
    "iceberg.tables": "default.events",
    "iceberg.catalog.type": "rest",
    "iceberg.catalog.uri": "https://localhost",
    "iceberg.catalog.credential": "<credential>",
    "iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "<warehouse name>"
    }
}
```

### Multi-table fan-out, static routing

This example writes records with `type` set to `list` to the table `default.events_list`, and
writes records with `type` set to `create` to the table `default.events_create`. Other records
will be skipped.

#### Create two destination tables

```sql
CREATE TABLE default.events_list (
    id STRING,
    type STRING,
    ts TIMESTAMP,
    payload STRING)
PARTITIONED BY (hours(ts));

CREATE TABLE default.events_create (
    id STRING,
    type STRING,
    ts TIMESTAMP,
    payload STRING)
PARTITIONED BY (hours(ts));
```

#### Connector config

```json
{
"name": "events-sink",
"config": {
    "connector.class": "org.apache.iceberg.connect.IcebergSinkConnector",
    "tasks.max": "2",
    "topics": "events",
    "iceberg.tables": "default.events_list,default.events_create",
    "iceberg.tables.route-field": "type",
    "iceberg.table.default.events_list.route-regex": "list",
    "iceberg.table.default.events_create.route-regex": "create",
    "iceberg.catalog.type": "rest",
    "iceberg.catalog.uri": "https://localhost",
    "iceberg.catalog.credential": "<credential>",
    "iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "<warehouse name>"
    }
}
```

### Multi-table fan-out, dynamic routing

This example writes to tables with names from the value in the `db_table` field. If a table with
the name does not exist, then the record will be skipped. For example, if the record's `db_table`
field is set to `default.events_list`, then the record is written to the `default.events_list` table.

#### Create two destination tables

See above for creating two tables.

#### Connector config

```json
{
"name": "events-sink",
"config": {
    "connector.class": "org.apache.iceberg.connect.IcebergSinkConnector",
    "tasks.max": "2",
    "topics": "events",
    "iceberg.tables.dynamic-enabled": "true",
    "iceberg.tables.route-field": "db_table",
    "iceberg.catalog.type": "rest",
    "iceberg.catalog.uri": "https://localhost",
    "iceberg.catalog.credential": "<credential>",
    "iceberg.catalog.warehouse": "<warehouse name>"
    }
}
```
