docs/spark-configuration.md, before:

---
title: "Configuration"
url: spark-configuration
aliases:
    - "spark/spark-configuration"
menu:
    main:
        parent: Spark
        identifier: spark_configuration
        weight: 0
---
<!--
 - Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
 - contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
 - this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
 - The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
 - (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
 - the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
 -
 -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 -
 - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 - distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 - WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 - See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 - limitations under the License.
 -->

# Spark Configuration

## Catalogs

Spark adds an API to plug in table catalogs that are used to load, create, and manage Iceberg tables. Spark catalogs are configured by setting Spark properties under `spark.sql.catalog`.

This creates an Iceberg catalog named `hive_prod` that loads tables from a Hive metastore:

```plain
spark.sql.catalog.hive_prod = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.hive_prod.type = hive
spark.sql.catalog.hive_prod.uri = thrift://metastore-host:port
# omit uri to use the same URI as Spark: hive.metastore.uris in hive-site.xml
```

Below is an example for a REST catalog named `rest_prod` that loads tables from REST URL `http://localhost:8080`:

```plain
spark.sql.catalog.rest_prod = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.rest_prod.type = rest
spark.sql.catalog.rest_prod.uri = http://localhost:8080
```

Iceberg also supports a directory-based catalog in HDFS that can be configured using `type=hadoop`:

```plain
spark.sql.catalog.hadoop_prod = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.hadoop_prod.type = hadoop
spark.sql.catalog.hadoop_prod.warehouse = hdfs://nn:8020/warehouse/path
```

{{< hint info >}}
The Hive-based catalog only loads Iceberg tables. To load non-Iceberg tables in the same Hive metastore, use a [session catalog](#replacing-the-session-catalog).
{{< /hint >}}

### Catalog configuration

A catalog is created and named by adding a property `spark.sql.catalog.(catalog-name)` with an implementation class for its value.

Iceberg supplies two implementations:

* `org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog` supports a Hive Metastore or a Hadoop warehouse as a catalog
* `org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkSessionCatalog` adds support for Iceberg tables to Spark's built-in catalog, and delegates to the built-in catalog for non-Iceberg tables

Both catalogs are configured using properties nested under the catalog name. Common configuration properties for Hive and Hadoop are:

| Property                                           | Values                        | Description                                                          |
| -------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.type              | `hive`, `hadoop` or `rest`    | The underlying Iceberg catalog implementation, `HiveCatalog`, `HadoopCatalog`, `RESTCatalog` or left unset if using a custom catalog |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.catalog-impl      |                               | The custom Iceberg catalog implementation. If `type` is null, `catalog-impl` must not be null. |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.io-impl                      |                               | The custom FileIO implementation. |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.metrics-reporter-impl        |                               | The custom MetricsReporter implementation.  |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.default-namespace | default                       | The default current namespace for the catalog |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.uri               | thrift://host:port            | Hive metastore URL for hive typed catalog, REST URL for REST typed catalog |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.warehouse         | hdfs://nn:8020/warehouse/path | Base path for the warehouse directory |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.cache-enabled     | `true` or `false`             | Whether to enable catalog cache, default value is `true` |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.cache.expiration-interval-ms | `30000` (30 seconds) | Duration after which cached catalog entries are expired; Only effective if `cache-enabled` is `true`. `-1` disables cache expiration and `0` disables caching entirely, irrespective of `cache-enabled`. Default is `30000` (30 seconds) |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.table-default._propertyKey_  |                               | Default Iceberg table property value for property key _propertyKey_, which will be set on tables created by this catalog if not overridden                                                                                               |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.table-override._propertyKey_ |                               | Enforced Iceberg table property value for property key _propertyKey_, which cannot be overridden by user                                                                                                                                 |

Additional properties can be found in common [catalog configuration](../configuration#catalog-properties).


### Using catalogs

Catalog names are used in SQL queries to identify a table. In the examples above, `hive_prod` and `hadoop_prod` can be used to prefix database and table names that will be loaded from those catalogs.

```sql
SELECT * FROM hive_prod.db.table; -- load db.table from catalog hive_prod
```

Spark 3 keeps track of the current catalog and namespace, which can be omitted from table names.

```sql
USE hive_prod.db;
SELECT * FROM table; -- load db.table from catalog hive_prod
```

To see the current catalog and namespace, run `SHOW CURRENT NAMESPACE`.

### Replacing the session catalog

To add Iceberg table support to Spark's built-in catalog, configure `spark_catalog` to use Iceberg's `SparkSessionCatalog`.

```plain
spark.sql.catalog.spark_catalog = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkSessionCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.spark_catalog.type = hive
```

Spark's built-in catalog supports existing v1 and v2 tables tracked in a Hive Metastore. This configures Spark to use Iceberg's `SparkSessionCatalog` as a wrapper around that session catalog. When a table is not an Iceberg table, the built-in catalog will be used to load it instead.

This configuration can use same Hive Metastore for both Iceberg and non-Iceberg tables.

### Using catalog specific Hadoop configuration values

Similar to configuring Hadoop properties by using `spark.hadoop.*`, it's possible to set per-catalog Hadoop configuration values when using Spark by adding the property for the catalog with the prefix `spark.sql.catalog.(catalog-name).hadoop.*`. These properties will take precedence over values configured globally using `spark.hadoop.*` and will only affect Iceberg tables.

```plain
spark.sql.catalog.hadoop_prod.hadoop.fs.s3a.endpoint = http://aws-local:9000
```

### Loading a custom catalog

Spark supports loading a custom Iceberg `Catalog` implementation by specifying the `catalog-impl` property. Here is an example:

```plain
spark.sql.catalog.custom_prod = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.custom_prod.catalog-impl = com.my.custom.CatalogImpl
spark.sql.catalog.custom_prod.my-additional-catalog-config = my-value
```

## SQL Extensions

Iceberg 0.11.0 and later add an extension module to Spark to add new SQL commands, like `CALL` for stored procedures or `ALTER TABLE ... WRITE ORDERED BY`.

Using those SQL commands requires adding Iceberg extensions to your Spark environment using the following Spark property:


| Spark extensions property | Iceberg extensions implementation                                   |
|---------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `spark.sql.extensions`    | `org.apache.iceberg.spark.extensions.IcebergSparkSessionExtensions` |

## Runtime configuration

### Read options

Spark read options are passed when configuring the DataFrameReader, like this:

```scala
// time travel
spark.read
    .option("snapshot-id", 10963874102873L)
    .table("catalog.db.table")
```

| Spark option    | Default               | Description                                                                               |
| --------------- | --------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| snapshot-id     | (latest)              | Snapshot ID of the table snapshot to read                                                 |
| as-of-timestamp | (latest)              | A timestamp in milliseconds; the snapshot used will be the snapshot current at this time. |
| split-size      | As per table property | Overrides this table's read.split.target-size and read.split.metadata-target-size         |
| lookback        | As per table property | Overrides this table's read.split.planning-lookback                                       |
| file-open-cost  | As per table property | Overrides this table's read.split.open-file-cost                                          |
| vectorization-enabled  | As per table property | Overrides this table's read.parquet.vectorization.enabled                                          |
| batch-size  | As per table property | Overrides this table's read.parquet.vectorization.batch-size                                          |
| stream-from-timestamp | (none) | A timestamp in milliseconds to stream from; if before the oldest known ancestor snapshot, the oldest will be used |

### Write options

Spark write options are passed when configuring the DataFrameWriter, like this:

```scala
// write with Avro instead of Parquet
df.write
    .option("write-format", "avro")
    .option("snapshot-property.key", "value")
    .insertInto("catalog.db.table")
```

| Spark option           | Default                    | Description                                                  |
| ---------------------- | -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| write-format           | Table write.format.default | File format to use for this write operation; parquet, avro, or orc |
| target-file-size-bytes | As per table property      | Overrides this table's write.target-file-size-bytes          |
| check-nullability      | true                       | Sets the nullable check on fields                            |
| snapshot-property._custom-key_    | null            | Adds an entry with custom-key and corresponding value in the snapshot summary (the `snapshot-property.` prefix is only required for DSv2)  |
| fanout-enabled       | false        | Overrides this table's write.spark.fanout.enabled  |
| check-ordering       | true        | Checks if input schema and table schema are same  |
| isolation-level | null | Desired isolation level for Dataframe overwrite operations.  `null` => no checks (for idempotent writes), `serializable` => check for concurrent inserts or deletes in destination partitions, `snapshot` => checks for concurrent deletes in destination partitions. |
| validate-from-snapshot-id | null | If isolation level is set, id of base snapshot from which to check concurrent write conflicts into a table. Should be the snapshot before any reads from the table. Can be obtained via [Table API](../../api#table-metadata) or [Snapshots table](../spark-queries#snapshots). If null, the table's oldest known snapshot is used. |
| compression-codec      | Table write.(fileformat).compression-codec | Overrides this table's compression codec for this write      |
| compression-level      | Table write.(fileformat).compression-level | Overrides this table's compression level for Parquet and Avro tables for this write |
| compression-strategy   | Table write.orc.compression-strategy       | Overrides this table's compression strategy for ORC tables for this write |

CommitMetadata provides an interface to add custom metadata to a snapshot summary during a SQL execution, which can be beneficial for purposes such as auditing or change tracking. If properties start with `snapshot-property.`, then that prefix will be removed from each property. Here is an example:

```java
import org.apache.iceberg.spark.CommitMetadata;

Map<String, String> properties = Maps.newHashMap();
properties.put("property_key", "property_value");
CommitMetadata.withCommitProperties(properties,
        () -> {
            spark.sql("DELETE FROM " + tableName + " where id = 1");
            return 0;
        },
        RuntimeException.class);
```

Commit message:

Core, Data, Spark 3.5: Support file and partition delete granularity

docs/spark-configuration.md, after:

---
title: "Configuration"
url: spark-configuration
aliases:
    - "spark/spark-configuration"
menu:
    main:
        parent: Spark
        identifier: spark_configuration
        weight: 0
---
<!--
 - Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
 - contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
 - this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
 - The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
 - (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
 - the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
 -
 -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 -
 - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 - distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 - WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 - See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 - limitations under the License.
 -->

# Spark Configuration

## Catalogs

Spark adds an API to plug in table catalogs that are used to load, create, and manage Iceberg tables. Spark catalogs are configured by setting Spark properties under `spark.sql.catalog`.

This creates an Iceberg catalog named `hive_prod` that loads tables from a Hive metastore:

```plain
spark.sql.catalog.hive_prod = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.hive_prod.type = hive
spark.sql.catalog.hive_prod.uri = thrift://metastore-host:port
# omit uri to use the same URI as Spark: hive.metastore.uris in hive-site.xml
```

Below is an example for a REST catalog named `rest_prod` that loads tables from REST URL `http://localhost:8080`:

```plain
spark.sql.catalog.rest_prod = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.rest_prod.type = rest
spark.sql.catalog.rest_prod.uri = http://localhost:8080
```

Iceberg also supports a directory-based catalog in HDFS that can be configured using `type=hadoop`:

```plain
spark.sql.catalog.hadoop_prod = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.hadoop_prod.type = hadoop
spark.sql.catalog.hadoop_prod.warehouse = hdfs://nn:8020/warehouse/path
```

{{< hint info >}}
The Hive-based catalog only loads Iceberg tables. To load non-Iceberg tables in the same Hive metastore, use a [session catalog](#replacing-the-session-catalog).
{{< /hint >}}

### Catalog configuration

A catalog is created and named by adding a property `spark.sql.catalog.(catalog-name)` with an implementation class for its value.

Iceberg supplies two implementations:

* `org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog` supports a Hive Metastore or a Hadoop warehouse as a catalog
* `org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkSessionCatalog` adds support for Iceberg tables to Spark's built-in catalog, and delegates to the built-in catalog for non-Iceberg tables

Both catalogs are configured using properties nested under the catalog name. Common configuration properties for Hive and Hadoop are:

| Property                                           | Values                        | Description                                                          |
| -------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.type              | `hive`, `hadoop` or `rest`    | The underlying Iceberg catalog implementation, `HiveCatalog`, `HadoopCatalog`, `RESTCatalog` or left unset if using a custom catalog |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.catalog-impl      |                               | The custom Iceberg catalog implementation. If `type` is null, `catalog-impl` must not be null. |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.io-impl                      |                               | The custom FileIO implementation. |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.metrics-reporter-impl        |                               | The custom MetricsReporter implementation.  |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.default-namespace | default                       | The default current namespace for the catalog |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.uri               | thrift://host:port            | Hive metastore URL for hive typed catalog, REST URL for REST typed catalog |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.warehouse         | hdfs://nn:8020/warehouse/path | Base path for the warehouse directory |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.cache-enabled     | `true` or `false`             | Whether to enable catalog cache, default value is `true` |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.cache.expiration-interval-ms | `30000` (30 seconds) | Duration after which cached catalog entries are expired; Only effective if `cache-enabled` is `true`. `-1` disables cache expiration and `0` disables caching entirely, irrespective of `cache-enabled`. Default is `30000` (30 seconds) |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.table-default._propertyKey_  |                               | Default Iceberg table property value for property key _propertyKey_, which will be set on tables created by this catalog if not overridden                                                                                               |
| spark.sql.catalog._catalog-name_.table-override._propertyKey_ |                               | Enforced Iceberg table property value for property key _propertyKey_, which cannot be overridden by user                                                                                                                                 |

Additional properties can be found in common [catalog configuration](../configuration#catalog-properties).


### Using catalogs

Catalog names are used in SQL queries to identify a table. In the examples above, `hive_prod` and `hadoop_prod` can be used to prefix database and table names that will be loaded from those catalogs.

```sql
SELECT * FROM hive_prod.db.table; -- load db.table from catalog hive_prod
```

Spark 3 keeps track of the current catalog and namespace, which can be omitted from table names.

```sql
USE hive_prod.db;
SELECT * FROM table; -- load db.table from catalog hive_prod
```

To see the current catalog and namespace, run `SHOW CURRENT NAMESPACE`.

### Replacing the session catalog

To add Iceberg table support to Spark's built-in catalog, configure `spark_catalog` to use Iceberg's `SparkSessionCatalog`.

```plain
spark.sql.catalog.spark_catalog = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkSessionCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.spark_catalog.type = hive
```

Spark's built-in catalog supports existing v1 and v2 tables tracked in a Hive Metastore. This configures Spark to use Iceberg's `SparkSessionCatalog` as a wrapper around that session catalog. When a table is not an Iceberg table, the built-in catalog will be used to load it instead.

This configuration can use same Hive Metastore for both Iceberg and non-Iceberg tables.

### Using catalog specific Hadoop configuration values

Similar to configuring Hadoop properties by using `spark.hadoop.*`, it's possible to set per-catalog Hadoop configuration values when using Spark by adding the property for the catalog with the prefix `spark.sql.catalog.(catalog-name).hadoop.*`. These properties will take precedence over values configured globally using `spark.hadoop.*` and will only affect Iceberg tables.

```plain
spark.sql.catalog.hadoop_prod.hadoop.fs.s3a.endpoint = http://aws-local:9000
```

### Loading a custom catalog

Spark supports loading a custom Iceberg `Catalog` implementation by specifying the `catalog-impl` property. Here is an example:

```plain
spark.sql.catalog.custom_prod = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.custom_prod.catalog-impl = com.my.custom.CatalogImpl
spark.sql.catalog.custom_prod.my-additional-catalog-config = my-value
```

## SQL Extensions

Iceberg 0.11.0 and later add an extension module to Spark to add new SQL commands, like `CALL` for stored procedures or `ALTER TABLE ... WRITE ORDERED BY`.

Using those SQL commands requires adding Iceberg extensions to your Spark environment using the following Spark property:


| Spark extensions property | Iceberg extensions implementation                                   |
|---------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `spark.sql.extensions`    | `org.apache.iceberg.spark.extensions.IcebergSparkSessionExtensions` |

## Runtime configuration

### Read options

Spark read options are passed when configuring the DataFrameReader, like this:

```scala
// time travel
spark.read
    .option("snapshot-id", 10963874102873L)
    .table("catalog.db.table")
```

| Spark option    | Default               | Description                                                                               |
| --------------- | --------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| snapshot-id     | (latest)              | Snapshot ID of the table snapshot to read                                                 |
| as-of-timestamp | (latest)              | A timestamp in milliseconds; the snapshot used will be the snapshot current at this time. |
| split-size      | As per table property | Overrides this table's read.split.target-size and read.split.metadata-target-size         |
| lookback        | As per table property | Overrides this table's read.split.planning-lookback                                       |
| file-open-cost  | As per table property | Overrides this table's read.split.open-file-cost                                          |
| vectorization-enabled  | As per table property | Overrides this table's read.parquet.vectorization.enabled                                          |
| batch-size  | As per table property | Overrides this table's read.parquet.vectorization.batch-size                                          |
| stream-from-timestamp | (none) | A timestamp in milliseconds to stream from; if before the oldest known ancestor snapshot, the oldest will be used |

### Write options

Spark write options are passed when configuring the DataFrameWriter, like this:

```scala
// write with Avro instead of Parquet
df.write
    .option("write-format", "avro")
    .option("snapshot-property.key", "value")
    .insertInto("catalog.db.table")
```

| Spark option           | Default                    | Description                                                  |
| ---------------------- | -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| write-format           | Table write.format.default | File format to use for this write operation; parquet, avro, or orc |
| target-file-size-bytes | As per table property      | Overrides this table's write.target-file-size-bytes          |
| check-nullability      | true                       | Sets the nullable check on fields                            |
| snapshot-property._custom-key_    | null            | Adds an entry with custom-key and corresponding value in the snapshot summary (the `snapshot-property.` prefix is only required for DSv2)  |
| fanout-enabled       | false        | Overrides this table's write.spark.fanout.enabled  |
| check-ordering       | true        | Checks if input schema and table schema are same  |
| isolation-level | null | Desired isolation level for Dataframe overwrite operations.  `null` => no checks (for idempotent writes), `serializable` => check for concurrent inserts or deletes in destination partitions, `snapshot` => checks for concurrent deletes in destination partitions. |
| validate-from-snapshot-id | null | If isolation level is set, id of base snapshot from which to check concurrent write conflicts into a table. Should be the snapshot before any reads from the table. Can be obtained via [Table API](../../api#table-metadata) or [Snapshots table](../spark-queries#snapshots). If null, the table's oldest known snapshot is used. |
| compression-codec      | Table write.(fileformat).compression-codec | Overrides this table's compression codec for this write      |
| compression-level      | Table write.(fileformat).compression-level | Overrides this table's compression level for Parquet and Avro tables for this write |
| compression-strategy   | Table write.orc.compression-strategy       | Overrides this table's compression strategy for ORC tables for this write |
| delete-granularity | Table write.delete.granularity       | Overrides this table's delete granularity for this write |

CommitMetadata provides an interface to add custom metadata to a snapshot summary during a SQL execution, which can be beneficial for purposes such as auditing or change tracking. If properties start with `snapshot-property.`, then that prefix will be removed from each property. Here is an example:

```java
import org.apache.iceberg.spark.CommitMetadata;

Map<String, String> properties = Maps.newHashMap();
properties.put("property_key", "property_value");
CommitMetadata.withCommitProperties(properties,
        () -> {
            spark.sql("DELETE FROM " + tableName + " where id = 1");
            return 0;
        },
        RuntimeException.class);
```
